The Vice President: Ladies and Gentlemen, this
is Joe Biden and I'm here filling in for President Obama,
who is traveling abroad.
And I'm here with a simple
message: middle-class
economics works.
Our economy has gone from
crisis to recovery to now to
resurgence-with the longest
streak of consecutive job
growth ever recorded in the
history of this country and
more than all other advanced
countries combined.
But to make sure everyone is
part of this resurgence,
we need to build on what we
know widens the path to the
middle class-and you all
know what it is,
access to education.
Folks, the source of our
economic power and middle
class strength in the 20th
Century was the fact that we
were among the first major
nations in the world to
provide twelve years of free
education for our citizens.
But in the 21st Century,
other countries have already
caught up and twelve years
is simply no longer enough-a
minimum of fourteen years is
necessary for families to
have a surer path to the
middle class and for the
United States to be able to
out-compete the rest of
the world.
Consider that by the end of
the decade,
two out of three of all jobs
will require an education
beyond high school, from an
18-week certificate to a
two-year associate's degree
to a four-year bachelor's,
or a PhD.
And consider that folks with
an associate's degree earn
25% more than someone who
graduated just from
high school.
And folks who graduate with
a four-year degree make
70% more.
But today, the cost of
higher education is too high
for too many Americans.
Too many folks are priced
out of a piece of the
middle-class dream.
And that's why the President
and I have a straightforward
plan to remove that barrier
and expand the pathway to
the middle class-by bringing
the cost of community
colleges down-down to zero.
Zero-for anyone willing to
work for it and for the
institutions that meet
certain basic requirements.
Our plan is no give-away.
Students must keep up their
grades and stay on track
to graduate.
States must contribute
funding and hold community
colleges accountable for the
results.
And community colleges must
maintain high graduation and
job placement rates.
And here's a key
point-community colleges
will have to offer courses
that are directly
transferrable to a four-year
degree.
If two years of community
college are free-and credits
can transfer to a four-year
university-that means the
cost of a four-year degree
will be cut in half for a
lot of working families
struggling to send their
children to college,
qualified children.
And under our plan, students
from low-income families
will be able to keep the
benefits that flow from
other financial aid, like
Pell grants,
to cover childcare, housing,
transportation-costs that
often keep them from
attending class and
completing a degree in the
first place.
But here's another key
point.
Not every good-paying job
will require a two-year or
four-year degree.
Some of these jobs will
require just a training
certificate that can be
earned in just a few months.
For example, you can go to
an 18-week coding
bootcamp-with no previous
experience in computers-and
become a computer programmer
making up to $70,000 a year.
There are other jobs in
fields like advanced
manufacturing and energy
that pay $40,000, $50,000,
$60,000 a year-jobs you can
raise a family on.
It's a simple fact that
community colleges are the
most flexible educational
institutions we have.
I've traveled all over this
country,
from New York to Iowa to
California,
to see how community
colleges create partnerships
with Fortune 500 companies
and local businesses to
generate jobs; support
apprenticeships with
organized labor, and prepare
hardworking students for
good-paying jobs in the
areas in which they live.
Making community colleges
free is good for workers,
it's good for companies, and
it's good for our economy.
Here's what we propose:
Close loopholes for the
wealthiest investors and
levy a .
07% fee on the biggest banks
to discourage the kind of
risky behavior that crashed
our economy just a few
years ago.
Doing just that would pay
for free community
college-and provide a leg up
for working families through
tax credits to cover
necessities like childcare.
That's what middle-class
economics is all
about-giving folks a fair
chance to get ahead.
A fair tax code.
No guarantees.
Just a fair chance.
It's simple folks, two years
of community college should
become as free and as
universal as high school is
today if we're to make this
economic resurgence
permanent and well into the
21st Century.
So I want to thank you all
for listening.
I hope you have a great
weekend and God bless you
all and may God protect our
troops.